---
title: Mindlogger
subtitle: Data Collection App
layout: project
modal-id: Mindlogger
old-modal-ids: [ab2cd]
categories: [project, app]
date: 2017-12-01
img: Mindlogger.jpg
thumbnail: Mindlogger-thumbnail.jpg
alt: "Mindlogger app"
description:  Want to collect data from yourself or others using an app but don’t want to do any programming?  This app enables you to build a variety of different types of surveys, as well as voice and drawing/tapping tasks.  The intended user will receive notifications to take only the surveys and tasks that you have built using the app.  We are currently building a sophisticated set of administrative controls to enable anyone to tailor the app for their own use to collect data and store and access the data where they please.
permalink: /Mindlogger.html
redirect_from:
  - /ab2cd.html
  - /mindlogger.html
people: [arno-klein, erik-ilyan, jon-clucas, anirudh-krishnakumar]
glyph: app.png
updated:
  latest:
    by: [jon-clucas]
    date: 2018-02-15
---

We are developing an end-to-end open source data collection platform called Mindlogger that can be configured 
to administer a wide range of assessment tools across different platforms, such as phones and tablets of 
different operating systems. The Mindlogger platform consists of a cross-platform app, secure online 
administrative panel, and online dashboard. The app consists of a modular set of activities that can be tailored 
in their selection, content, and (text and audio) instructions for a given set of users. 
Timed notifications remind a user to perform each activity, and the user has the opportunity to redo any activity. 
All data are stored in a backend database.
An administrator can view the data for each activity in the dashboard, and can customize which activities are 
on/off for a given user through the administrative panel.

Activities in the current prototype include:
  - Surveys. Users can fill out either a sequential or accordian-style survey in basic or table format:
    - single selection
    - multiple choice
    - integer increment/decrement
    - free text entry
    - image selection
  - Audio recording. Users can record a voice sample, with an option to play back the sample.
  - Drawing/tapping. Users can be instructed to draw a picture on the touchscreen, optionally atop an image, and the timestamp will be saved for every coordinate, enabling calculations of reaction times, delay times, task completion times, as well as a means of recording timing and errors in sequential operations. 

The Mindlogger dashboard allows a user with the right permissions to view responses to individual items.
Once an activity such as a survey instrument is filled out, reviewed, and submitted from the app, 
the data are immediately viewable in timeline and list views on the online dashboard and individual response 
items are viewable upon selecting individual activities. Data can be stored on any server if set up appropriately. 
We have our data stored in Amazon Web Services according to HIPAA-compliant standards. 
The responses can be downloaded as well in different formats by a user with the correct permissions. 

To load a questionnaire from a spreadsheet into the app, please use [our template](http://matter.childmind.org/Mindlogger/csv2json.html).

{% include app_related.md %}
